# Joint models quantify associations between T-cell kinetics and allo-immunological events after allogeneic stem cell transplantation and subsequent donor lymphocyte infusion

## Abstract

Alloreactive donor-derived T-cells play a pivotal role in alloimmune responses after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT); both in the relapse-preventing Graft-versus-Leukemia (GvL) effect and the potentially lethal complication Graft-versus-Host-Disease (GvHD). The balance between GvL and GvHD can be shifted by removing T-cells via T-cell depletion (TCD) to reduce the risk of GvHD, and by introducing additional donor T-cells (donor lymphocyte infusions [DLI]) to boost the GvL effect. However, the association between T-cell kinetics and the occurrence of allo-immunological events has not been clearly demonstrated yet. Therefore, we investigated the complex associations between the T-cell kinetics and alloimmune responses in a cohort of 166 acute leukemia patients receiving alemtuzumab-based TCD alloSCT. Of these patients, 62 with an anticipated high risk of relapse were scheduled to receive a prophylactic DLI at 3 months after transplant. In this setting, we applied joint modelling which allowed us to better capture the complex interplay between DLI, T-cell kinetics, GvHD and relapse than traditional statistical methods. We demonstrate that DLI can induce detectable T-cell expansion, leading to an increase in total, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell counts starting at 3 months after alloSCT. CD4+ T-cells showed the strongest association with the development of alloimmune responses: higher CD4 counts increased the risk of GvHD (hazard ratio 2.44, 95% confidence interval 1.45-4.12) and decreased the risk of relapse (hazard ratio 0.65, 95% confidence interval 0.45-0.92). The results of this study advocate the use of joint models to further study T-cell kinetics in different settings

## Authors

[...]
